The Effect of Scaling, Retrieval Augmentation and Form on the Factual
Consistency of Language Models
Lovisa Hagström1 Denitsa Saynova1 Tobias Norlund1
Moa Johansson1 Richard Johansson1,2
1

Chalmers University of Technology 2 University of Gothenburg
{lovhag, saynova}@chalmers.se

arXiv:2311.01307v1 [cs.CL] 2 Nov 2023

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) make natural
interfaces to factual knowledge, but their usefulness is limited by their tendency to deliver
inconsistent answers to semantically equivalent
questions. For example, a model might predict
both “Anne Redpath passed away in Edinburgh.”
and “Anne Redpath’s life ended in London.” In
this work, we identify potential causes of inconsistency and evaluate the effectiveness of
two mitigation strategies: up-scaling and augmenting the LM with a retrieval corpus. Our
results on the LLaMA and Atlas models show
that both strategies reduce inconsistency while
retrieval augmentation is considerably more efficient. We further consider and disentangle the
consistency contributions of different components of Atlas. For all LMs evaluated we find
that syntactical form and other evaluation task
artifacts impact consistency. Taken together,
our results provide a better understanding of
the factors affecting the factual consistency of
language models.

1

Introduction

We have recently observed the development of several highly performant pretrained large language
models (LLMs) that have expanded the boundaries
of what we can expect from foundational language
models. These recent successes have highlighted
the potential of using language models as a simpler
interface to factual knowledge (Petroni et al., 2019;
Dinan et al., 2019).
However, in fact critical settings we require not
only high accuracy but also consistency, i.e. robustness to lexical variations in semantically equivalent
queries. Recent LM developments have mainly
improved on accuracy, while the question of consistency has seen less attention. As exemplified
in Figure 1, even SoTA LMs may produce different outputs depending on lexical variations in semantically equivalent queries (Elazar et al., 2021;
Ribeiro et al., 2019; Cao et al., 2021). This sug-

subject
object
relation
Fact Anne Redpath - place of death - Edinburgh
Template: <Y> expired at <X>.
Queries 1. Anne Redpath expired at <X>.
2. Anne Redpath’s life ended in <X>.
3. Anne Redpath passed away in <X>.

Atlas
Retriever
Wikipedia

LLaMA

Reader
Answers 1. Southampton
2. London
3. Edinburgh

Figure 1: Overview of how consistency is computed in
ParaRel for Atlas and LLaMA.

gests that performance on benchmarks for factual
information does not measure true factual knowledge, since models do not generalize well across
rephrased prompts.
Problems with inconsistency extend beyond factrelated accuracy, as they also indicate a tendency to
hallucinate and a lack of factuality in foundational
LMs (Ji et al., 2023). As inconsistent models may
be fragile in unexpected manners, they are difficult to interpret and we are in a worse position for
providing limitations on what they may generate
(Wang et al., 2022).
To promote desirable properties such as robustness and interpretability we may need to reconsider
our model designs. As an alternative to up-scaling,
we have seen the rise of model designs guided
by inductive biases to promote various properties
(Feder et al., 2022). Examples of such models are
text retrieval-augmented models that condition predictions on retrieved text passages for improved
adaptability, interpretability and efficiency (Izacard
and Grave, 2021; Izacard et al., 2023; Wu et al.,
2022), neurosymbolic models that condition predic-

tions on logic for reasoning capabilities (Pacheco
and Goldwasser, 2021) and fact-injected LMs for
interpretability (Verga et al., 2021).
Our goal in this paper is to improve our understanding of consistency in foundational LMs. We
start by investigating methods to improve model
consistency. We consider two potential solutions,
1) model up-scaling and 2) Wikipedia text retrieval
augmentation, building on suitable inductive biases related to factual consistency. Furthermore,
we identify and investigate potential sources of
inconsistency of LMs. Our contributions can be
summarized as follows:
• We investigate ParaRel, a benchmark for evaluating consistency (Elazar et al., 2021) and
develop an improved version of it1 (Section 2).
We refer to this version as ParaRel* throughout this paper. We have removed ambiguous fact duplicates and added four query-level
metrics to estimate inconsistency sources related to evaluation task format, such as linguistic form effects (Section 4).
• We investigate the hypothesis that model scaling mitigates inconsistency (Section 3.1). Our
evaluation of varying sizes of the LLaMA and
Atlas models (Touvron et al., 2023; Izacard
et al., 2023) show that scale improves consistency, but with diminishing returns.
• We hypothesize that retrieval augmentation
mitigates inconsistency and investigate this
using Atlas (Izacard et al., 2023) – a retrievalaugmented model – along with non-retrieval
models of similar scale (Section 3.2). We
show that Atlas outperforms all baselines on
the ParaRel* task.
• We also investigate causes and correlations
related to consistency of Atlas (Section 5).
– We define metrics for measuring retrieval
consistency and find that the Atlas retriever components generally is consistent and that retrieval consistency correlates with prediction consistency.
– Through interventions on the retrieval
component we find that the consistency
and relevance of the retrieved result both
affect the consistency and accuracy of
the predictions.
1
Code and datasets available at https://github.com/
dsaynova/pararel.

– We investigate to what extent the reader
component depends on term frequencies
in the retrieved result and find it to be
more inconsistent when this dependence
is weaker.

2

Data

We describe the original ParaRel benchmark in Section 2.1 and our improvements in Section 2.2. Section 2.3 explains the metrics studied for ParaRel*.
2.1

ParaRel

ParaRel (Elazar et al., 2021) is based on LAMA
(Petroni et al., 2019), an evaluation task based on
Wikidata that measures factual knowledge stored in
LMs through prompting for subject-relation-object
tuples. ParaRel adds a layer of semantically equivalent cloze-style prompts to LAMA, which in turn
allows us to measure the consistency of LMs with
respect to the knowledge tuples represented by
LAMA (see Figure 1). The idea is that a model is
consistent if it is invariant to query paraphrases.
ParaRel measures consistency for N-1 relations,
for which there is only one correct object alternative for a subject-relation pair, and plausibility for
N-M relations, where there are several correct objects for a subject-relation pair. We only consider
the N-1 relations that measure consistency. Additionally, following Elazar et al. (2021), we simplify
the task by restricting the candidate sets. The models are only allowed to generate an answer from the
alternatives in the ParaRel* data for each relation.
2.2

Analysis and Improvements

Analysis of the ParaRel data showed that it contains
exact duplicate tuples – e.g. Audi R8 producedby Audi. This refers once to the Wikidata entity
Q758775 (prototype race car) and once to Q758778
(sports car model), which are not distinguishable
by name only. Additionally, duplicated subjectrelation pairs (with a different object) also exist
in the data. For example, SNES-CD produced-by
Sony and SNES-CD produced-by Nintendo are both
present in the data. Appendix F presents statistics
for the number of such duplicates.
Since we aim to use ParaRel to measure consistency for N-1 relations, we remove all subjectrelation instances that occur more than once in the
dataset. Relation P37 official-language had 280
duplicates out of 900 data entries and cannot be
considered to be a N-1 relation, why we completely
remove it from our updated ParaRel* version.

This removal of duplicates resulted in an updated
ParaRel* of 30 relations with 21,830 data tuples in
total, instead of the original 23,097. Some of the
retained relations contained more duplicates than
others, but never more than 10% of the data tuples.
2.3

Evaluation Metrics

ParaRel provides several statistics that can be used
to evaluate model performance. We mainly focus
on three: Consistency – pairwise agreement between prompts for each tuple; Accuracy – accuracy
when using the original LAMA prompt; Consistent & Accurate – what percentage of subjects get
assigned the correct object for all prompts.
The consistency metric results in measurements
for all possible query pairs per tuple and relation.
To get one consistency value per model evaluated,
we calculate the micro-average of the consistency
values across tuples per relation and then take the
macro-average across relations, following Elazar
et al. (2021). The pairwise comparisons used to estimate consistency imply that other metrics relating
to consistency, by correlation or stratification, also
need to be on a pairwise query-level.

3

Effect of Scaling and Retrieval
Augmentation

To investigate the effect of scaling and retrieval
augmentation on the consistency of LMs we evaluate LLaMA (Section 3.1) and Atlas (Section 3.2)
on ParaRel* and report the results in Section 3.3.
3.1

Effect of Scaling

Model scaling has been a successful approach to
improving performance on many NLP tasks. We
evaluate LLaMA (7B, 13B, 33B and 65B parameters) (Touvron et al., 2023) on ParaRel* (see Appendix A for details on how we do this) and measure whether consistency improves with model
size. LLaMA represents traditional state-of-theart LLMs, being decoder-only auto-regressive LMs
trained on over a trillion tokens. We also investigate
this for retrieval-augmented models by comparing
two sizes of the Atlas model.
3.2

Effect of Retrieval Augmentation

We expect retrieval-augmented LMs to generally
be more consistent than standard LMs. Given a
consistent retrieval component, the prediction of a
retrieval-augmented model is conditioned on something bound to be more consistent than the query

alone. Retrieval augmentation from e.g. Wikipedia
has been successful for several fact-intensive question answering tasks (Izacard et al., 2023; Lewis
et al., 2020) and reduced hallucination (Shuster
et al., 2021; Thoppilan et al., 2022).
Atlas is a retrieval-augmented LM optimized for
few-shot knowledge-intensive tasks. It was developed by Izacard et al. (2023) and retrieves passages from Wikipedia and a common crawl dump.
The model consists of a dense retriever based on
the Contriever architecture (Izacard et al., 2022)
and a reader based on the T5 seq2seq architecture (Raffel et al., 2020). The model performs on
par with, or even better than, many larger fullyparametric language models on e.g. Natural Questions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019).
We evaluate Atlas on ParaRel* and compare
its performance to relevant baselines, i.e. nonretrieval-augmented model counterparts. We
mainly use the base version of Atlas with 330M
parameters in our analysis and to some extent also
the Atlas-large with 880M parameters, using the
model weights released by the authors.2 We use
Wikipedia 2017 passages as the retrieval corpus
since this should match the temporal origin of the
ParaRel* data and keep the retrieval indices fixed.
We retrieve 20 passages per query.
Since Atlas has been pre-trained with MLM as
the pretext task, we can evaluate it zero-shot with
some adaptations (see Appendix A).
Baselines To properly investigate the effects of
the different model development choices for Atlas
on consistency, we need to compare Atlas to reasonable baselines. To reason about the benefits of
the retrieval augmentation and additional training
provided for Atlas, we compare against the fullyparametric T5-base model Atlas was initialized
from.3 To assess the benefits of retrieval augmentation specifically, we evaluate Atlas in a closed-book
setting without augmentation, while we acknowledge that the model has not been adapted to this
setting.
We also compare Atlas-base and BERT-large to
estimate the benefits of retrieval augmentation. The
latter model should be a good representative for the
retrieval-free setup as it has an advantage in all
aspects except for retrieval augmentation. BERTlarge has slightly more parameters than Atlas-base,
is better adapted to the encoder-based ParaRel* task
2
3

https://github.com/facebookresearch/atlas#models

google/t5-base-lm-adapt

Model
atlas-base
atlas-large
atlas-base*
t5-base
bert-base
bert-large
llama-7b
llama-13b
llama-30b
llama-65b

Cons

Acc

C&A

0.74±0.15
0.77±0.14
0.60±0.23
0.59±0.23
0.58±0.24
0.60±0.23
0.67±0.18
0.68±0.17
0.70±0.17
0.71±0.16

0.80±0.16
0.81±0.14
0.41±0.24
0.39±0.23
0.46±0.26
0.48±0.26
0.67±0.21
0.70±0.21
0.75±0.18
0.75±0.19

0.42±0.27
0.47±0.29
0.24±0.22
0.22±0.19
0.27±0.24
0.29±0.27
0.36±0.28
0.39±0.28
0.42±0.28
0.43±0.28

Table 1: ParaRel* results of Atlas, LLaMA and baselines averaged over all 30 N-1 relations. *=closed-book.

and has mainly been trained on Wikipedia, which
could give it an advantage (Elazar et al., 2021).
3.3

Consistency Performance

Table 1 shows the ParaRel* zero-shot results for
all evaluated models for all 30 relations. Following
the work by Elazar et al. (2021), all tables report
the macro-average and standard deviation over the
different relations. Our findings based on these
results are as follows:
Retrieval augmentation has a sizeable effect on
consistency and accuracy We find that the Atlas
models are more consistent compared to all other
evaluated models. Since Atlas-base outperforms
BERT-large in spite of the disadvantages outlined
in Section 3.2, we have good reason to believe that
retrieval augmentation leads to improved consistency and is the main contributor to the superior
performance of Atlas. Atlas-base and large are also
more accurate on ParaRel*. Accuracy is not the
main interest of this work, however we expect these
effects to be interconnected.
While Atlas has superior consistency on
ParaRel* compared to the other models investigated, it does not achieve perfect consistency. Despite being developed for fact-critical tasks and
allowed to retrieve information from Wikipedia,
the model can generate different answers to semantically equivalent factual questions. We investigate
potential reasons related to the evaluation task format and reader-retriever interaction in Section 4
and Section 5.
Model scaling has a sizeable effect on consistency and accuracy We observe improved consistency and accuracy performance with size for

both LLaMA and Atlas. The consistency increases
with approximately 1% in LLaMA and 3% in Atlas
per doubling in model size. Similar effects of upscaling were also observed by Elazar et al. (2021).
The larger LLaMA models also outperform BERTlarge, while they do not outperform Atlas.
Retrieval augmentation is more efficient than
up-scaling in increasing consistency Atlas-base
(330M parameters) performs on par with LLaMA65B despite being 90 times smaller. Evidently,
retrieval augmentation with Atlas is more efficient
than up-scaling for increased model consistency.
We also note that up-scaling LLaMA yields diminishing returns with respect to consistency. Consequently, we have found a foundational NLP issue –
consistency – for which model up-scaling is not the
complete solution. Using model designs guided by
inductive biases is a promising approach for robust
and interpretable NLP systems.

4

Effect of Evaluation Task Format

Apart from retrieval-augmentation and scaling, we
also expect form and evaluation task format to have
had an impact on the consistency results in Table 1.
ParaRel*, like many other fact-critical evaluation
sets (Petroni et al., 2019; Norlund et al., 2021; Sciavolino et al., 2021), relies on automatic prompt
generation by substituting different subjects into
pre-defined templates. Additionally, both templates
and testing data are extracted and constructed semiautomatically. Using synthetic data and automated
steps in benchmarks generation is common in NLP
pipelines (He et al., 2022; Meng et al., 2022b).
However, the convenience of this approach comes
with the risk of producing disfluent queries. Previous work has found that language models learn
form and syntax faster than semantics and general natural language understanding (NLU) (Zhang
et al., 2021). We hypothesize that this can lead to a
prioritization of text fluency and syntax over facts,
influencing model consistency. Therefore, we also
evaluate the sensitivity of our models to issues that
may arise from the evaluation task format.
4.1 Metrics to Estimate Inconsistency Sources
from the Evaluation Task Format
Issues from the evaluation task format manifest as
four query-related effects, falling into three groups:
semantic overlap in answers, unidiomatic language
(on both template and object level), and subjectobject similarity. While semantic overlap is caused

Semantic overlap The exact string matching
used in ParaRel* to determine model success, taken
together with the constrained decoding may lead to
biased estimations of model performance. Some relations include more ambiguity than others, where
the model is allowed to choose between semantically close answer alternatives, but only one of
these is accepted as a correct answer. Relation P30
located-in-continent, for example, only includes
Africa, Americas, Antarctica, Asia, and Europe,
while relation P101 field-of-work contains both biology and science, and relation P19 born-in contains both Glasgow and Scotland. We hypothesise
that this added ambiguity may affect consistency
as measured by ParaRel*, and therefore one of the
comparisons we perform is on the consistency of
the 12 relations that have semantic overlap in the
answer options (for a full list see Appendix H) and
the remaining 18 relations that do not have an overlap.
Unidiomatic language Certain template-answer
combinations in ParaRel* result in disfluencies.
This is caused by either an ill-fitting template or
an object, that, when combined with a template,
results in unidiomatic language.
For example “Anne Redpath died in Edinburgh”
is much more natural than “Anne Redpath died at
Edinburgh”, even though to a human the meaning
is clear in both. This affects templates in 6 relations (for a full list of unidiomatic templates see
Appendix H).
Furthermore, “Solar Mass is named after the Sun”
sounds more natural than the ParaRel* entry “Solar
Mass is named after Sun”. This mainly affects objects in three relations: P101 specializes-in, P138
named-after, and P361 part-of. A manual annotation of the answer alternatives can be found in
Appendix H, where we identified objects that were
expressed unnaturally within the template, typically because they lacked a determiner or plural
form. A more systematic classification to refine
these labels through larger-scale human annotation
or processing with a grammar checker is left for
future work.
To evaluate the effect of these issues, we compare the pairwise consistency of affected relations
between the cases with and without unidiomatic

objects and templates respectively.
Subject and object similarity Several relations
contain an overlap between the subject and object
– for example – Nokia N9 produced-by Nokia. We
hypothesise that in these cases the model can be
guided by a simple heuristic rather than accessing factual information, which may lead to an increased performance on ParaRel*. We identify 9
relations that contain more than 20% of tuples with
an overlap between subject and object stems (see
Appendix H) and report pairwise consistency for
queries with and without subject-object similarity.
4.2

Evaluation task format has an effect on
consistency
atlas-base llama65 bert-large
0.8

Consistency

by the evaluation setup, the remaining issues relate
to a larger issue of the effect of language form on
model behaviour.

0.6

0.4

bj
tic
tic
ma
ma
j-O
Sub ilarity Unidio ject Unidio plate
Ob
Sim
Tem

ic
ant
Sem erlap
Ov

Figure 2: Performance for query-related sources of inconsistency. Filled-in marks indicate performance on
affected data, non-filled-in – on data not affected.

Figure 2 indicates the consistency performance
and analysis of model sensitivity to evaluation task
format issues, including form. Detailed results are
available in Appendix G. All evaluation task format related phenomena discussed have an effect on
consistency across all model settings. We see that
unidiomatic objects and templates affect all models
on a similar scale, whereas some models are less
susceptible than others to subject-object similarity
and semantic overlap in the answer alternatives.
Our results show that all evaluated LMs are fragile to language usage, such that we cannot expect
them to be robust in the face of less fluent queries.
Judging whether this is acceptable LM behaviour
could be based on the severity of the disfluency.
We could leverage our results to create better evaluation tasks by filtering out samples that prevent

syntax
query

Ti

Oi

Y

sion (1) summarizes the expected behavior of an
ideal retriever.
R(F, T |β) ⊥ T |F

F
semantics

Ri
nT

Figure 3: Causal effects on model consistency for a
retrieval-augmented model. Oi denotes the prediction
made by the model given retrieved information Ri and
query, based on a template Ti and invariant fact F . For
each fact we have nT templates. Y is the consistency,
i.e. fraction of equal Oi , Oj pairs. Dashed lines indicate
weak effects.

us from measuring our quantity of interest, such
as factual knowledge under correct language usage.
However, we argue that in the face of the less severe linguistic variations measured in this work, it
is desirable to have a LM that is robust and stays
faithful to its factual predictions.

5

Effect of Retrieval Components

We found Atlas to be more consistent compared
to LMs without retrieval augmentation. In this
section we perform a deeper analysis on the effects
of letting a model retrieve over some corpus with
focus on the retriever and reader components.
We use the DAG depicted in Figure 3 as a starting point for our reasoning. We define a query
to be the combination of a fact tuple, F and template T , as depicted in Figure 1. We can see F
and T as the semantics and syntax of a query respectively. A model prediction for a certain query
and retrieved information can thus be described as
O(T, F, R(F, T |β)|θ), where θ and β are model
parameters of the reader and retriever respectively.
The motivation for why retrieval-augmented
LMs should be more consistent than standard LMs
builds on two parts related to the retrieval and inference steps of the retrieval-augmented model. First,
a perfect retrieval result should ideally be independent of the syntax (template) of a query conditioned
on the semantics (facts) of the query. The retriever
is trained on the more narrow task of identifying relevant factual aspects of a query and matching those
to the information in the retrieval corpus, thereby
becoming less dependent on syntactic variations.
Furthermore, the retriever has a more restricted
output space and can only choose between already
existing facts rather than create new ones. Expres-

(1)

Second, the generated output of an ideal retrievalaugmented model for a fact-related query should
be independent of the syntax, given the semantics
of the query and corresponding perfect retrieved
information. Expression (2) formalizes this idea.
In the ideal case, the retrieved information adds
an inductive bias to the generation process that
conditions the prediction to be independent of the
syntax of the query.
O(T, F, R|θ) ⊥ T |R, F

(2)

In practice, we do not expect Atlas to correspond
perfectly to the ideal case. Our experiments investigate these dependencies and how they interact
with the consistency. We measure retriever consistency (Section 5.1), the effect of the retrieved
information on consistency (Section 5.2) and the
dependence of the reader on the retrieved information (Section 5.3).
5.1

Retriever consistency

We hypothesize that the retriever is less dependent
on syntax compared to a standard LM and thereby
more consistent. To estimate the dependence on
syntax of the Atlas retriever, we measure retriever
consistency by estimating the pairwise retriever
agreement for the prompt pairs for each tuple in
ParaRel*. As no automatic method exists for estimating retriever consistency, we propose and evaluate three novel metrics. For Atlas, the retrieved information is in the format of 20 Wikipedia passages,
so our metrics for pairwise retriever agreement rely
on 1) id overlap between retrieved passage sets, 2)
title overlap between retrieved passage sets and 3)
retriever query embedding similarity.
For the two first metrics, we calculate the id
and title overlap of the 20 retrieved documents
(normalized to 1), estimating exact passage match
and whether passages were retrieved from the same
Wikipedia page respectively. These metrics do not
account for the fact that different passages, coming
from different Wikipedia pages, could contain the
same information, especially in the current setting
that queries for simple tuple-based facts. Thus, the
metrics are strict and should give a lower bound on
retriever consistency.

The embedding based retriever consistency metric is more soft. For this metric, we consider the embeddings produced by the retriever for each query
paraphrase and estimate their similarity. Since the
Atlas retrieval is based on a search with respect
to the similarity between embeddings of queries
and passages, the query embedding similarities for
paraphrases can be expected to reflect retriever consistency. We use the cosine similarity between
retriever embeddings for paraphrase pairs as an
estimate for retriever consistency.
To get a baseline performance of the retriever
consistency metrics we also evaluate them on
pairs of randomly sampled passages previously retrieved by Atlas-base. We use two methods for
random sampling, 1) sample passage/query pairs
completely at random across relations and subjects,
denoted as r-all, and 2) sample passage/query pairs
from retrieval results for the same relations but
different subjects, denoted as r-subject.
Model

Metric Similarity µ Similarity σ

r-all

id
title
emb
id
title
emb

0.00±0.00
0.00±0.00
0.54±0.04
0.01±0.01
0.01±0.01
0.64±0.04

0.01±0.01
0.02±0.01
0.06±0.01
0.02±0.02
0.02±0.02
0.06±0.01

id
title
emb
id
title
emb

0.51±0.10
0.58±0.10
0.88±0.04
0.52±0.10
0.59±0.09
0.88±0.04

0.19±0.03
0.20±0.04
0.05±0.02
0.19±0.03
0.20±0.04
0.05±0.02

r-subject

atlas-base

atlas-large

Table 2: Similarity metrics used to estimate retriever
consistency. r-all denotes random sampling over subjects and relations, and r-subject sampling over subjects
with the relation fixed. µ refers to the distribution of the
mean per relation and σ refers to the distribution of the
standard deviation of the metrics per relation.

We apply our retriever consistency metrics to the
Atlas retriever and report the results in Table 2. Our
findings are as follows:
The Atlas retriever exhibits a weak dependency
on syntax For the id and title overlap metrics, we
first set a threshold in order to label a retrieval result as consistent. From inspection by example we
found the retriever able to find many passages on
the same topic, some with semantic overlap despite

not sharing the same id or title. An average overlap of 0.5 could thus be seen as a quite consistent
performance, especially if we compare them to the
low values for the baselines. There are multiple
factors that can account for the incomplete overlap
– e.g. the number of paragraphs that are related to a
particular fact can vary.
For the metric based on embedding similarities,
we observe a significant increase in embedding similarity for queries with the same semantic meaning
compared to for random pairs of queries. The retriever embedding similarities also capture some
relation information, as the embeddings for random
queries sampled over subjects have an increased
similarity compared to the random baseline.
We conclude that the Atlas retriever is quite consistent according to our metrics, especially if we
compare against the randomized baselines. However, its consistency is not perfect across paraphrases, indicating a weak dependence on syntax.
We note that there are many nuances to automatic
metrics for retriever consistency that remain to
be explored. Future work could for example include measuring the consistency among passages
retrieved for the same query.

Reader and retriever consistencies are correlated To estimate the effect of the retriever consistency on the overall model consistency, we measure the Pearson correlations between reader consistency and our retriever consistency metrics. We
expect consistent predictions to correlate with consistent retrieval results and vice versa, building on
arguments related to Expressions (1)-(2).
We observe a weak correlation between all retriever consistency metrics and the Atlas consistency. For both id and title the Pearson correlation
is 0.16 ± 0.08, while for query embedding similarity it’s 0.14 ± 0.13. As previously discussed,
we expect retrieval augmentation to condition the
prediction to be less syntax dependent, why we
expected some form of correlation to exist, but we
cannot fully explain why it is not higher. One explanation is imperfect metrics for retriever consistency.
Most likely, there are additional factors at play that
determine whether Atlas is consistent. After all,
the Atlas reader is only conditioned on and not
controlled by the retrieved information.

Intervention

Cons

none
0.74±0.15
relevant
0.79±0.15
irr cohesive 0.61±0.22
irr incohesive 0.58±0.24

Acc

C&A

0.80±0.16
0.80±0.16
0.42±0.24
0.42±0.24

0.42±0.27
0.48±0.28
0.23±0.23
0.22±0.22

Table 3: Atlas-base results for different interventions on
the retrieval augmentation. relevant denotes a consistent
and relevant retrieved result. irr cohesive a consistent
and unified result, but irrelevant. irr incohesive a consistent but completely random result for each of the 20
passages.

5.2

Interventions to further investigate the
effect of retrieval augmentation

We carry out intervention experiments on the retrieved information to investigate its effect on Atlas.
To test whether consistent retrieved information
across paraphrases contributes to more consistent
predictions, we set the retrieved information Ri to
a fixed value across paraphrases indexed by i in
ParaRel*, meaning that ∀i Ri = R. We then measure the consistency of the reader conditioned on
this consistent retrieved information.
Taking the effect of retrieved information quality
into account, we test three different approaches for
setting the fixed retrieved information for a given
fact F = (s, r, o). First, given the corresponding
query paraphrases for F indexed by i we take the
retrieved passages for one of the paraphrases i′ and
use that as the retrieved information for the remaining paraphrases R(s, r), i = R(s, r), i′ , making each
R(s, r), i both relevant and consistent. Second, we
take the retrieved passages for a query paraphrase
i′ for another subject s′ from the same relation
r and set this as the fixed retrieved information
R(s, r), i = R(s′ , r), i′ , making the retrieved information consistent and cohesive across the retrieved
passages but irrelevant. Third, we use a set of
completely random passages Rrand as the retrieved
information R(s, r), i = Rrand , making it consistent
but irrelevant and incohesive. See Appendix B for a
sketched example. The two latter approaches let us
disentangle the effect of relevance from the effect
of consistency for the retrieved information.
We report the results from these interventions in
Table 3. Our findings based on these results are as
follows:
Consistent and relevant retrieval augmentation
causes more consistent predictions We con-

clude that relevant and consistent retrieved information leads to a more consistent Atlas model,
while not perfectly consistent. To some extent, this
confirms our hypothesis related to Expression (2),
while further investigations are needed to explain
the absence of perfect consistency. As we saw in
our previous results, the effect of form could play
a role.
Another potential explanation for the lack of perfect consistency is given by Longpre et al. (2021).
They found that a context-augmented LM may
ignore the provided context if it contradicts the
knowledge stored in the model parameters, hypothesizing that fact popularity plays an important role.
Future work could examine whether this phenomena also extends to retrieval-augmented models.
Consistent while irrelevant retrieval augmentation does not result in more consistent predictions We can also observe from Table 3 how
consistent but irrelevant retrieved information not
related to the query at hand leads to significant
decrease in both consistency and accuracy. We observe similar behaviour regardless of whether the
irrelevant retrieved information was cohesive or not
(i.e. related to the same fact). Seemingly, the reader
prediction is not only dependent on consistent retrieved information, and the reader may be able to
discriminate what retrieved information is relevant
to the query. This corroborates our theory that additional inconsistency sources for Atlas exist apart
from retriever consistency. More assumptions are
needed for the variables in Expression (2) before
we can accurately describe the workings of Atlas.
5.3

Reader dependence on retrieval result

To further reason about the effect of retrieval augmentation on consistency, we would like to know
to what extent the Atlas reader is dependent on the
retrieval result. We start by investigating one possible heuristic – namely, that the reader relies on
frequencies in the retrieved passages.
We estimate the dependence of the Atlas reader
on the retrieval result using the rank of the reader
prediction according to term frequencies in the retrieved passages. This is further described in Appendix C. Since the Atlas reader may be more or
less dependent on the retrieved passages depending on how well it reflects a correct answer to the
query we also measure the rank of the gold label
following the same approach. We expect a useful
result to rank the correct answer higher compared

Model Type

Rank

pred 0.09±0.06
gold 0.07±0.05
large pred 0.08±0.06
gold 0.07±0.05

base

Match

No match

0.06±0.04
0.05±0.04
0.05±0.04
0.05±0.04

0.19±0.09
0.13±0.07
0.19±0.08
0.14±0.08

Table 4: Frequency-based averaged rankings in the retrieved result of the reader’s predictions and the gold
labels. The Pearson ρ between consistency, prediction and respectively gold rank were −0.34 ± 0.12 and
−0.18 ± 0.10.

to a less useful result.
We expect consistent predictions to be more reliant on the retrieval result compared to inconsistent predictions and can measure this using our
defined metrics. Moreover, we expect the reader
to be more reliant on useful retrieval results, and
thus more consistent for these, compared to for less
useful results that are less successful in surfacing
the correct answer.
We estimate the dependence of the Atlas reader
on the retrieval result using our ranking and report
the results in Table 4. An average rank of 0 corresponds to the reader always predicting the top
answer candidate according to the retriever. Our
findings based on these results are as follows:
Reader dependence on retrieval result correlates
with consistency The average rank of a prediction is higher for consistent predictions, compared
to inconsistent. It could be that the reader for some
instances is less faithful to the frequency based signal of the retriever and simply picks an answer less
supported by the retrieval result. Drawing from our
results in Figure 2, we hypothesize that this could
happen if the answer supported by the retrieved information would produce an unidiomatic sentence.
Alternatively, some samples may be more difficult
for both reader and retriever to process, resulting
in lower rankings of the predictions made.
Retriever frequency of the correct answer correlates with consistency The retriever generally
promotes the correct answer frequency-wise. Additionally, similarly to our previous observation, the
retriever is largely better at promoting the correct
answer for samples for which the reader is consistent. This indicates that there are samples for which
the retriever struggles to find suitable passages and
that the reader is less consistent for these.

6

Related Work

While there is a large body of work on the factual accuracy of LMs, the question of consistency
has received less attention. This issue was investigated by Elazar et al. (2021), which introduced the
ParaRel benchmark which forms the basis of our
work here. On the accuracy side, there have been
investigations that relate effects of the training data
(primarily how frequently facts occur) to the correctness of factual predictions (Mallen et al., 2023;
Kandpal et al., 2023; Elazar et al., 2022).
The approach of viewing a complex LM as a
causal system and carrying out interventions to investigate the effect of components on the model’s
behavior was pioneered by Vig et al. (2020). Further work by Meng et al. (2022a) applies this
methodology to examining fact associations and
proposes a hypothesis of how models recall factual
information stored in their parameters.

7

Conclusions and Future Work

In this work, we investigate methods to improve
factual consistency of LMs and further reason
about potential sources of inconsistency. We find
that up-scaling, represented by LLaMA, generally
improves on consistency, while it is inefficient
and surpassed by retrieval augmentation, represented by Atlas. Retrieval augmentation produce
the largest consistency improvement. However,
Atlas does not achieve perfect consistency even
for perfectly consistent retrieved passages, this indicates that additional inconsistency sources are
involved and persistent in spite of consistent conditioning. These are potentially related to form
anomalies and changeable reader dependency on
the retrieved information. In conclusion, we have
identified and measured several potential sources
of (in)consistency that should aid future work on
improving the robustness of LMs, while much remains to be investigated.
Future work includes evaluating consistency
of additional model designs, such as contextaugmented LLMs and models that build on knowledge graphs (Shu et al., 2022). We could also make
use of methods similar to the ones proposed by
Meng et al. (2022a) to further investigate parametric versus non-parametric memorization in the context of retrieval augmentation and its effects on
consistency.

Limitations
We reason about benefits related to up-scaling and
retrieval augmentation based on our results from
Atlas and LLaMA, but this may not give the complete picture of the performance of these model
types in general.
Based on the performance of Atlas, we reason
about the effect of retrieval augmentation on inconsistency, while we cannot perfectly control for the
confounding effect of different training data. Generally, training data has been found to have a big
impact on model performance and especially when
relating to accessing factual information. The best
way to estimate the exact effect of retrieval augmentation would be to use a proper closed-book
version of Atlas, trained without augmentation on
the same data. However, since the weights for this
baseline have not been released we resort to addressing this by marginalization over several other
relevant baselines.
Similarly, we compare LLaMA to Atlas to
reason about the benefits of LLMs versus retrieval augmentation, while these two models have
been trained on different datasets and we cannot
marginalize over training data effects. Elazar et al.
(2022) found that models trained to a larger extent
on Wikipedia performed better on ParaRel, potentially because Wikipedia is a more unified source of
factual knowledge. In this sense, LLaMA might be
at a disadvantage, due to requiring large amounts
of training data that are not guaranteed to be unified
or factual.
Furthermore, we base our analysis of consistency
on a single benchmark dataset, which to the best
of out knowledge is the largest and most relevant
dataset for these types of evaluations. However, further investigations into how these results generalize
beyond ParaRel* and its specific design choices remains to be investigated.
We focus our study on cloze-style queries, which
limits how well the test set can be handled by different models. These prompts are more suited
for masked language modelling than for autoregressive models, so further investigations of the
effects of the chosen task formulation is needed.
Furthermore, models cannot express level of certainty, so it is unclear to what extent the performance is tied to the (un)availability of facts in the
model. Together with the constrained decoding
method applied in this work, this may lead to models being able to surface a fact in certain settings,

but that may not serve as a binary distinction between a fact being represented or not in the model.
The different level of difficulty of recalling a fact is
a further possible confounder left for future work.

Ethics Statement
Our work has the overall goal of improving consistency of LMs – a goal that, if accomplished, could
make AI generated text harder to identify with potential negative consequences. On the positive side,
improved consistency of LMs should make them
easier to explain and safer to use in fact critical
situations. The ParaRel* data used in this work is
not associated with any ethical complications.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Marco Kuhlmann, whose support and insightful feedback was essential for the
completion of this work.
This work was partially supported by the Wallenberg AI, Autonomous Systems and Software
Program (WASP) funded by the Knut and Alice
Wallenberg Foundation and by the Wallenberg AI,
Autonomous Systems and Software Program – Humanities and Society (WASP-HS) funded by the
Marianne and Marcus Wallenberg Foundation and
the Marcus and Amalia Wallenberg Foundation.
The computations were enabled by resources provided by the National Academic Infrastructure for
Supercomputing in Sweden (NAISS) at Alvis partially funded by the Swedish Research Council
through grant agreement no. 2022-06725, and by
the Berzelius resources provided by the Knut and
Alice Wallenberg Foundation at the National Supercomputer Centre.

References
Boxi Cao, Hongyu Lin, Xianpei Han, Le Sun, Lingyong Yan, Meng Liao, Tong Xue, and Jin Xu. 2021.
Knowledgeable or educated guess? revisiting language models as knowledge bases. In Proceedings
of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics and the 11th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1860–1874, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Emily Dinan, Stephen Roller, Kurt Shuster, Angela
Fan, Michael Auli, and Jason Weston. 2019. Wizard
of Wikipedia: Knowledge-powered conversational
agents. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).

Yanai Elazar, Nora Kassner, Shauli Ravfogel, Amir
Feder, Abhilasha Ravichander, Marius Mosbach,
Yonatan Belinkov, Hinrich Schütze, and Yoav Goldberg. 2022. Measuring causal effects of data statistics on language model’s ‘factual’ predictions. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2207.14251.
Yanai Elazar, Nora Kassner, Shauli Ravfogel, Abhilasha Ravichander, Eduard Hovy, Hinrich Schütze,
and Yoav Goldberg. 2021. Measuring and improving
consistency in pretrained language models. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:1012–1031.
Amir Feder, Katherine A. Keith, Emaad Manzoor, Reid
Pryzant, Dhanya Sridhar, Zach Wood-Doughty, Jacob Eisenstein, Justin Grimmer, Roi Reichart, Margaret E. Roberts, Brandon M. Stewart, Victor Veitch,
and Diyi Yang. 2022. Causal inference in natural language processing: Estimation, prediction, interpretation and beyond. Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 10:1138–1158.
Xuanli He, Islam Nassar, Jamie Kiros, Gholamreza Haffari, and Mohammad Norouzi. 2022. Generate, Annotate, and Learn: NLP with Synthetic Text. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 10:826–842.
Gautier Izacard, Mathilde Caron, Lucas Hosseini, Sebastian Riedel, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand Joulin, and
Edouard Grave. 2022. Unsupervised dense information retrieval with contrastive learning. Transactions
on Machine Learning Research.
Gautier Izacard and Edouard Grave. 2021. Leveraging
passage retrieval with generative models for open domain question answering. In Proceedings of the 16th
Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume,
pages 874–880, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Gautier Izacard, Patrick Lewis, Maria Lomeli, Lucas
Hosseini, Fabio Petroni, Timo Schick, Jane DwivediYu, Armand Joulin, Sebastian Riedel, and Edouard
Grave. 2023. Atlas: Few-shot learning with retrieval
augmented language models. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 24(251):1–43.
Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan
Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang, Andrea
Madotto, and Pascale Fung. 2023. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(12):1–38.
Nikhil Kandpal, Haikang Deng, Adam Roberts, Eric
Wallace, and Colin Raffel. 2023. Large language
models struggle to learn long-tail knowledge. In
Proceedings of the 40th International Conference
on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research, pages 15696–15707.
PMLR.

Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris Alberti,
Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, Llion Jones, Matthew
Kelcey, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew M. Dai, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Quoc Le, and Slav Petrov. 2019. Natural questions: A benchmark for question answering
research. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 7:452–466.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio
Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020.
Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledgeintensive nlp tasks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pages 9459–
9474. Curran Associates, Inc.
Shayne Longpre, Kartik Perisetla, Anthony Chen,
Nikhil Ramesh, Chris DuBois, and Sameer Singh.
2021. Entity-based knowledge conflicts in question
answering. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 7052–7063, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Alex Mallen, Akari Asai, Victor Zhong, Rajarshi Das,
Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023.
When not to trust language models: Investigating
effectiveness of parametric and non-parametric memories. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 9802–9822, Toronto,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan
Belinkov. 2022a. Locating and editing factual associations in gpt. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 35, pages 17359–17372.
Curran Associates, Inc.
Yu Meng, Jiaxin Huang, Yu Zhang, and Jiawei Han.
2022b. Generating training data with language models: Towards zero-shot language understanding. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Tobias Norlund, Lovisa Hagström, and Richard Johansson. 2021. Transferring knowledge from vision to
language: How to achieve it and how to measure it?
In Proceedings of the Fourth BlackboxNLP Workshop
on Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for
NLP, pages 149–162, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Maria Leonor Pacheco and Dan Goldwasser. 2021.
Modeling content and context with deep relational
learning. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:100–119.
Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel,
Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu, and

Alexander Miller. 2019. Language models as knowledge bases? In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP),
pages 2463–2473, Hong Kong, China. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine
Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou,
Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. 2020. Exploring the limits
of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research,
21(1):5485–5551.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Carlos Guestrin, and Sameer
Singh. 2019. Are red roses red? evaluating consistency of question-answering models. In Proceedings
of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 6174–6184, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Christopher Sciavolino, Zexuan Zhong, Jinhyuk Lee,
and Danqi Chen. 2021. Simple entity-centric questions challenge dense retrievers. In Proceedings of
the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 6138–6148, Online
and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Yiheng Shu, Zhiwei Yu, Yuhan Li, Börje Karlsson,
Tingting Ma, Yuzhong Qu, and Chin-Yew Lin. 2022.
TIARA: Multi-grained retrieval for robust question
answering over large knowledge base. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 8108–8121,
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Kurt Shuster, Spencer Poff, Moya Chen, Douwe Kiela,
and Jason Weston. 2021. Retrieval augmentation
reduces hallucination in conversation. In Findings
of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
EMNLP 2021, pages 3784–3803, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall,
Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du,
YaGuang Li, Hongrae Lee, Huaixiu Steven Zheng,
Amin Ghafouri, Marcelo Menegali, Yanping Huang,
Maxim Krikun, Dmitry Lepikhin, James Qin, Dehao
Chen, Yuanzhong Xu, Zhifeng Chen, Adam Roberts,
Maarten Bosma, Yanqi Zhou, Chung-Ching Chang,
Igor Krivokon, Will Rusch, Marc Pickett, Kathleen S.
Meier-Hellstern, Meredith Ringel Morris, Tulsee
Doshi, Renelito Delos Santos, Toju Duke, Johnny Soraker, Ben Zevenbergen, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran,
Mark Diaz, Ben Hutchinson, Kristen Olson, Alejandra Molina, Erin Hoffman-John, Josh Lee, Lora
Aroyo, Ravi Rajakumar, Alena Butryna, Matthew

Lamm, Viktoriya Kuzmina, Joe Fenton, Aaron Cohen, Rachel Bernstein, Ray Kurzweil, Blaise AgueraArcas, Claire Cui, Marian Croak, Ed H. Chi, and
Quoc Le. 2022. Lamda: Language models for dialog
applications. CoRR, abs/2201.08239.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier
Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix,
Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro,
Faisal Azhar, et al. 2023. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.13971.
Pat Verga, Haitian Sun, Livio Baldini Soares, and
William Cohen. 2021. Adaptable and interpretable
neural MemoryOver symbolic knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages
3678–3691, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Jesse Vig, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yonatan Belinkov,
Sharon Qian, Daniel Nevo, Yaron Singer, and Stuart Shieber. 2020. Investigating gender bias in language models using causal mediation analysis. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
volume 33, pages 12388–12401. Curran Associates,
Inc.
Xuezhi Wang, Haohan Wang, and Diyi Yang. 2022.
Measure and improve robustness in NLP models: A
survey. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 4569–4586, Seattle, United States.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yuxiang Wu, Yu Zhao, Baotian Hu, Pasquale Minervini, Pontus Stenetorp, and Sebastian Riedel. 2022.
An efficient memory-augmented transformer for
knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In Proceedings of
the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 5184–5196, Abu
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yian Zhang, Alex Warstadt, Xiaocheng Li, and
Samuel R. Bowman. 2021. When do you need billions of words of pretraining data? In Proceedings
of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics and the 11th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1112–1125, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

A

Generating predictions for ParaRel*
with LLaMA and Atlas

To evaluate LLaMA on ParaRel*, we compute the
log likelihoods of all answer options given a relation, template and subject, and select the answer
with the highest likelihood score.
Since Atlas is a seq2seq model, we cannot use
the same technique to restrict the prediction candidates as for the BERT-like models. Instead, we
make use of an approach similar to the one used for
LLaMA. For a given query, we get the latent representation from the Atlas reader encoder and give
this as input to the Atlas reader decoder together
with each answer option. The answer options are
formatted as e.g. “<extra_id_0>France” to suit
the T5 format. We then select the answer option
with the highest likelihood score according to the
reader decoder. To ascertain that the constrained
decoding approach is working, we compare the
freely generated model answers to the constrained
model answers and ensure that they match when
the model happens to freely generate an accepted
answer option.

B

Interventions on Retrieval
Augmentation

To analyse the effects of retrieval consistency, we
develop several strategies for setting consistent retrieved passages: relevant, irrelevant but cohesive,
irrelevant and incohesive. These refer to whether
the we expect the information in the passages to
be related to the questioned asked (relevant) or to
the type of relation in the question (cohesive). Table 5 shows a sketched example of how these are
assigned.

C

Measuring reader dependence on
retrieval result

We measure reader dependence on the retrieval
result by taking the frequency-based rank of the
reader prediction compared to all other possible
answer alternatives. This is done in two steps: 1)
we order the ParaRel* answer alternatives by frequency for each retrieved result and 2) estimate
the ranking (normalised between 0 and 1) of the
prediction within this order. To relate this metric to
consistency, we make the estimates on prompt-pair
level by taking the average of the two corresponding prediction rankings. This allows us to estimate
both mean rank per relation, but also mean rank for
consistent and inconsistent predictions separately.

To give an example how the metric works, consider the input query “Y is located in [X].” and assume that we have the answer candidates Canada,
Norway and Singapore. We generate the corresponding Atlas retrieval result with term frequencies as indicated in Table 6 and pass the passages
to the reader to get the prediction Y=Singapore.
According to the term frequencies, this prediction
has rank 2, while Canada has rank 3 and Norway
1. After normalisation to values between 0 and 1,
the rank of Y is 0.5 and this is what we report.

D

Knowledgeable Consistency

ParaRel also proposes two metrics for deeper analysis of cases when the model is expected to know
the fact and when the fact may not be in the model.
They define knowledgeable consistency as the pairwise consistency for any fact, for which any of the
prompts was able to retrieve the correct answer;
and unknowledgeable consistency – pairwise consistency for fact that no prompt is successful. We
propose one more metric, which expands on the
idea of knowledgeable consistency. Since the original metric in ParaRel counts any pair matches between prompts, as long as one of them was correct,
this can be misleading in estimating how consistent to the true fact the model is. We define the
new metric as the pairwise consistency of prompts,
where both prompts agree and are both correct.

E

Additional results

We calculate the extended metrics described in
Appendix D for the models we evaluate (See Table 7). We observe similar trends in performance
between the models. One trend we notice is that the
unknowledgeable consistency plateaus for larger
model sizes.
Furthermore, we perform stratified measurement
of consistency of retrieval passages depending on
wheter the overall model prediction matched (was
consistent) or not (See Table 8).
Finally, we perform analysis of our proposed
metrics for measuring retrieval consistency and calculate how well they correlate with each other (See
Table 9). Unsurprisingly, we find a high correlation
between id and title match (since id is sub-level of
title). We also find embedding distance correlates
with id and title.

Set of retrieved passages
query

no intervention

relevant

irr cohesive

irr incohesive

Eibenstock is located in [Y] .
Eibenstock, which is located in [Y].
Eibenstock, located in [Y].
Glencree is located in [Y] .
Robert Bunsen specializes in [Y]

{P1 , P2 , P3 }

{P1 , P2 , P3 }

{P9 , P10 , P11 }

{P3 , P10 , P14 }

{P1 , P3 , P4 }

{P1 , P2 , P3 }

{P9 , P10 , P11 }

{P3 , P10 , P14 }

{P2 , P3 , P5 }

{P1 , P2 , P3 }

{P9 , P10 , P11 }

{P3 , P10 , P14 }

{P9 , P10 , P11 }
{P12 , P13 , P14 }

Table 5: An example of intervention on the retrieved passages when querying for the location of Eibenstock. We
refer to the passages as P1 , P2 , P3 ... and assume that 3 passages are retrieved for each query.

Candidate
Canada
Norway
Singapore

Frequency
2
7
5

Table 6: Candidate term frequencies for a retrieval result,
as an example.

F

Duplicated entries in ParaRel

See Table 10 for statistics for the duplicated data
entries in ParaRel.

G

Detailed results for evaluation task
format effects on consistency

Detailed results for evaluation task format related
effects can be found in Tables 11 to 14, where we
report consistency per model and per group.

H

ParaRel* flags indicating potential
data issues

Some queries are identified to have semantically
similar answer options, which may cause the model
to be unfairly punished for predicting, for example,
science instead of biology. For a summary see
Table 15.
Some queries are observed to result in unidiomatic language due to the template structure. For
details see Table 16.
Furthermore, resulting texts may be unidiomatic
due to the gold label that we want to predict. Detailed list of those objects can be found in Table 17.
Finally, Table 18 shows the full list of relations
that contain some overlap between the subject in
the prompt and the gold label we want to predict, potentially allowing the model to use shallow
heuristics for its prediction.

Model

Know Cons

K-know Cons

Unk Cons

atlas-base
atlas-large
atlas-base*
t5-base
bert-base
bert-large
llama-7b
llama-13b
llama-30b
llama-65b

0.75 ± 0.15
0.78 ± 0.14
0.65 ± 0.24
0.64 ± 0.23
0.63 ± 0.25
0.64 ± 0.24
0.69 ± 0.18
0.71 ± 0.17
0.72 ± 0.17
0.73 ± 0.16

0.71 ± 0.17
0.74 ± 0.15
0.57 ± 0.28
0.56 ± 0.26
0.56 ± 0.29
0.57 ± 0.28
0.63 ± 0.22
0.65 ± 0.20
0.67 ± 0.19
0.69 ± 0.18

0.59 ± 0.19
0.61 ± 0.20
0.51 ± 0.20
0.52 ± 0.23
0.45 ± 0.21
0.47 ± 0.20
0.48 ± 0.16
0.50 ± 0.17
0.50 ± 0.17
0.50 ± 0.17

Table 7: ParaRel* results of Atlas, LLaMA and some baselines averaged over all 30 N-1 relations with extra metrics.
*=closed-book.

Model

Metric

Match sim.

No match sim.

atlas-base

id
title
embedding
id
title
embedding

0.53 ± 0.10
0.60 ± 0.09
0.89 ± 0.04
0.54 ± 0.09
0.60 ± 0.09
0.89 ± 0.04

0.45 ± 0.11
0.52 ± 0.11
0.87 ± 0.04
0.46 ± 0.11
0.52 ± 0.11
0.87 ± 0.04

atlas-large

Table 8: The pairwise retriever similarity results stratified over whether the corresponding prediction made by the
retriever was consistent. Complement to Table 2. Match consistency refers to the retriever consistency for cases for
which the final model prediction is consistent and no match consistency refers to cases for which the final model
prediction is inconsistent.

id
title
embedding

id

title

embedding

1.00 ± 0.00
0.82 ± 0.20
0.20 ± 0.12

0.82 ± 0.20
1.00 ± 0.00
0.21 ± 0.11

0.20 ± 0.12
0.21 ± 0.11
1.00 ± 0.00

Table 9: The correlations between the retriever consistency metrics for random sampling across relations and
subjects (’all’) averaged over ParaRel* relations. 1000 pairs were sampled per sampling method.

Relation

Name

P17
P19
P20
P27
P30
P36
P37
P101
P103
P106
P127
P131
P136
P138
P140
P159
P176
P178
P264
P276
P279
P361
P364
P407
P413
P449
P495
P740
P937
P1376
P1412

located-in
born-in
died-in
citizen-of
located-in-continent
capital-of
official-language
specializes-in
native-language
is-a-by-profession
owned-by
located-in
plays-music
named-after
affiliated-with-religion
headquarter-in
produced-by
developed-by
represented-by-music-label
located-in
subclass-of
part-of
original-language
written-in-language
plays-in-position
originally-aired-on
created-in
founded-in
worked-in
capital-of
communicated-in

Total

#entries

#duplicates

#exact

912
779
817
958
959
471
900
571
919
821
616
775
859
461
432
801
925
588
53
764
900
746
756
857
952
801
905
843
853
179
924

2
0
0
0
4
14
280
52
2
0
0
0
2
23
10
4
19
12
2
74
4
64
6
31
0
9
2
0
21
8
2

0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
8
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0

23097

647

15

Table 10: We count the number of data tuples for each of the 31 ParaRel N-1 relations and indicate how many of
these are duplicates with respect to subject and relation. We also indicate how many of these duplicates are exact
duplicates, in the sense that a subject-relation-object tuple occurs multiple times for a relation.

Model

subject-object similarity

no subj-obj similarity

atlas-base
atlas-large
bert-base-cased
bert-large-cased
llama-07b
llama-65b

0.83 ± 0.13
0.88 ± 0.10
0.79 ± 0.14
0.81 ± 0.11
0.87 ± 0.08
0.86 ± 0.11

0.75 ± 0.15
0.79 ± 0.13
0.50 ± 0.16
0.55 ± 0.14
0.72 ± 0.11
0.76 ± 0.10

Table 11: Pairwise consistency for datapoints containing subject-object similarity and for those that do not. Results
are based on 9 relations that contain at least 20% subject-object similarity.

Model

object issue

no object issue

atlas-base
atlas-large
bert-base-cased
bert-large-cased
llama-07b
llama-65b

0.60 ± 0.22
0.55 ± 0.23
0.39 ± 0.26
0.45 ± 0.27
0.45 ± 0.13
0.43 ± 0.14

0.74 ± 0.16
0.71 ± 0.16
0.58 ± 0.40
0.59 ± 0.35
0.66 ± 0.21
0.68 ± 0.20

Table 12: Pairwise consistency for datapoints containing object level issues and for those that do not. Results are
based on 3 relations that have been labeled with object issues.

Model

template issue both

template issue one

template issue none

atlas-base
atlas-large
bert-base
bert-large
llama-07b
llama-65b

0.43 ± 0.71
0.49 ± 0.73
0.30 ± 0.69
0.32 ± 0.70
0.35 ± 0.68
0.39 ± 0.69

0.68 ± 0.13
0.73 ± 0.13
0.43 ± 0.28
0.48 ± 0.26
0.56 ± 0.20
0.62 ± 0.17

0.83 ± 0.10
0.84 ± 0.03
0.65 ± 0.23
0.72 ± 0.21
0.76 ± 0.18
0.77 ± 0.18

Table 13: Pairwise consistency for cases where one, both or none of the compared templates have a template issue.
Results are based on 6 relations, where we identified template issues.

Model

semantic overlap

no semantic overlap

atlas-base
atlas-large
bert-base-cased
bert-large-cased
llama-07b
llama-65b

0.73 ± 0.13
0.78 ± 0.10
0.48 ± 0.23
0.51 ± 0.20
0.63 ± 0.17
0.67 ± 0.16

0.75 ± 0.17
0.77 ± 0.16
0.65 ± 0.23
0.67 ± 0.23
0.69 ± 0.19
0.74 ± 0.15

Table 14: ParaRel* results of Atlas and some baselines averaged over all 30 N-1 relations divided into relations that
have semantic ovelap in the answer options (12 relations) and those that do not have an overlap (18 relations).

Relation

Name

Comment

P19
P20
P101
P106
P131
P140
P159
P276
P279
P361
P740
P937

born-in
died-in
specializes-in
is-a-by-profession
located-in
affiliated-with-religion
headquarter-in
located-in
subclass-of
part-of
founded-in
worked-in

geographic (City/Country)
geographic (City/Country)
several general options (e.g. art and science)
someone could be multiple roles - e.g a diplomat and politician
geographic (City/Country)
includes (Catholicism, Christian, Christianity) and (Islam, Muslim)
geographic (City/Country)
geographic (City/Country)
several general options (e.g. art and science)
several general options (e.g. art and science)
geographic (City/Country)
geographic (City/Country)

Table 15: Relations where answer alternatives could have ambiguity due to semantic overlap.

Relation

Template

Comment

P19 born-in

[X] is native to [Y].
[X] was native to [Y].
[X] died at [Y].
[X] passed away at [Y].
[X] lost their life at [Y].
[X] succumbed at [Y].
[X] is [Y] citizen.
[X] works as [Y].
[X], who works as [Y].
[X]’s occupation is [Y]
the occupation of [X] is [Y].
the profession of [X] is [Y].
[X] is named in [Y]’s honor.
[X] was named in [Y]’s honor.
[X], named in [Y]’s honor.
[X], which is named in [Y]’s honor.
[X], which was named in [Y]’s honor.
[Y]’s capital, [X].
[Y]’s capital city, [X].
[Y]’s capital is [X].
[Y]’s capital city is [X].

e.g. "Claude Arrieu is native to Paris"

P20 died-in

P27 citizen-of
P106 is-a-by-profession

P138 named-after

P1376 capital-of

e.g. "Claude Arrieu was native to Paris"
preposition
preposition
preposition
preposition
[X] is France citizen ->a French citizen
may require a/an
may require a/an
may require a/an
may require a/an
may require a/an
apostrophe
apostrophe
apostrophe
apostrophe
apostrophe
apostrophe
apostrophe
apostrophe
apostrophe

Table 16: Relations containing unidiomatic templates.

P101 - specializes in

P138 named after

P361 part of

Internet
astronomer
bird
car
cave
comedian
diplomat
economist
habitat
hotel
icon
mathematician
miniature
musical
musician
nightclub
novelist
philosopher
physician
physicist
priest
programmer
stock
stomach
virus
website

Alps
Americas
Arctic
Bible
Moon
Netherlands
Sun
arrow
backpack
brake
canon
cube
flower
glove
grape
horse
hotel
liver
mayor
mole
monastery
patent
patriarch
red

Alps
Americas
Antarctic
BBC
Bible
Caribbean
Caucasus
Internet
Nile
Quran
airline
airport
ankle
aquarium
army
artillery
atom
banana
battery
bicycle
bird
bow
brain
breast
bridge
candle

car
cartridge
castle
cavalry
cell
cemetery
chromosome
clergy
cloud
cocktail
coin
comet
computer
door
ear
economist
ecosystem
engine
enzyme
eye
facade
film
firearm
fish
fleet
flower

foot
forest
fruit
galaxy
gang
gene
genome
gospel
graph
head
heart
kidney
leaf
liver
lung
matrix
molecule
mosque
municipality
navy
neck
nerve
orbit
organism
parish
penis

Table 17: Relations containing unidiomatic objects.

perfume
pistol
piston
port
radar
saddle
screw
sea
seed
shield
skeleton
skull
spacecraft
stomach
sword
track
trail
tree
triangle
turbine
volcano

Relation

Name

P36
P127
P131
P138
P176
P178
P276
P279
P361

capital-of
owned-by
located-in
named-after
produced-by
developed-by
located-in
subclass-of
part-of

Table 18: Relations containing subject and object similarity.

